---
#widget: pages
#headless: true

title: 'Alkemio attends PIT-UN 2024 (virtually!)'
date: "2024-12-04"
lastmod: "2024-12-04"

math: false
diagram: false 

summary: "Our takeaways from PIT-UN Summit 2024."
authors:
- smyth-neil
- tharakan-robin 
tags:
- pit-un 
- conference


categories:
- Events


featured: false
draft: false

#image:
 # placement: 1
 # preview_only: true
    
--- 

The development and adoption of digital technologies and the resulting
benefits and harms do not stay within geographical borders. Chances are
that every technology interaction we have daily is with a product or
service developed by a Big Tech company. It is increasingly evident that
these companies yield disproportionate power over many aspects of our
lives, including our relationships, politics, education, and healthcare.

We are also aware of the need to build alternatives. Just as the impact
of technology is not limited within borders, our response through
building movements, such as public interest technology, cannot remain
limited to our countries. We must learn from other efforts and
collaborate to take back control of our digital lives.

To learn about the trends and champions of public interest technology in
the U.S., members of the Alkemio team virtually attended the annual
PIT-UN (Public Interest Technology-University Network) conference held
at San José State University in California in November 2024. As one of
the earliest initiatives worldwide, PIT-UN was celebrating its fifth
anniversary, and the two-day event provided examples of the success of
its journey so far and key areas that need focus in the immediate
future. Here are the five discussions that caught our attention,
especially considering their relevance to the work at Alkemio.

1.  **The private sector has an important role to play in public
    interest technology**

The private sector plays a crucial yet often overlooked role in
advancing public-interest technology. Too often, the responsibility for
using technology for the public good falls solely on individuals, civil
society organizations, non-profit organizations, and government bodies.
While there is a natural distrust of tech companies, especially given
the excesses of Silicon Valley, there are startups and tech enterprises
aligned with public interest goals but have not yet had the opportunity
to engage meaningfully. The private sector has unique
strengths—particularly its ability to move quickly to innovate, take
risks, and experiment in ways that government agencies and non-profits
often cannot. Today, there are ownership and governance structures to
ensure that private-sector tech companies remain true to their purpose,
which can create the trust necessary for greater collaboration. By
actively involving the private sector, the growing movement can tap into
new ideas, resources, and approaches that drive progress. A truly
inclusive movement must create space for businesses to contribute to the
shared vision, leveraging their potential to accelerate and scale
positive change.

2.  **Existing technology funding mechanisms are often incompatible with
    the public interest technology vision**

Existing funding models, such as venture capital and private equity, are
often at odds with the vision of public interest technology. These
models prioritize scaling at all costs and extreme financial returns,
which do not align with the long-term, socially focused goals of
building technology for the public good. Silicon Valley’s success, built
on speculation and the promise of high-profit "exits," has limited our
imagination when it comes to alternative financing models. This narrow
approach has been cemented in our collective mindset, largely due to the
high-profile success stories of a few large ventures. However, the
concept of "patient capital"—funding initiatives with the goal of
sustainable, long-term returns and alignment with public interest
values—strongly resonates with the need for a more responsible, ethical
approach. Many foundation leaders have emphasized the importance of
mobilizing private capital to supplement the limited pool of grant
funding, which is spread thin across numerous important causes. Bringing
new funding mechanisms is key to enabling the large impact these
foundations seek to have.

Shifting how we think about funding also requires a reimagining of the
extractive business models that often exploit our data and monitor our
usage. To build a more equitable and impactful tech ecosystem, we must
rethink not only the sources of funding but also the values that guide
its distribution and use.

3.  **The focus on “tech hubs” and a need for more collaboration over
    competition**

Public interest technology, like many transformative social movements,
is constrained by limited resources, forcing organizations and
individuals to compete for funding and support. This competition often
leads to inefficiency, with multiple groups – universities, departments,
and individuals, working on similar projects in isolation, duplicating
efforts and missing opportunities for greater impact. To drive
meaningful progress, collaboration is essential, and this is a big focus
of the members of PIT-UN. The success of public interest technology
depends not only on individual innovation but also on collective action.
Establishing "tech hubs" can be a powerful solution, breaking down these
silos and fostering cross-sector partnerships. By prioritizing
collaboration over competition, tech hubs create spaces for shared
knowledge, pooled resources, and aligned goals. Embracing collaboration
and building stronger networks will be key to unlocking the full
potential of public interest technology.

4.  **Partnerships must respect the independence and principles of
    public interest technology projects**

Once collaboration is established, these partnerships must preserve the
integrity and independence of public-interest technology projects. Many
universities and nonprofits today depend on resources from large private
companies to carry out their work—whether it is AI research supported by
GPUs or collaboration tools provided by tech giants. However, these
partnerships often come with significant power imbalances. The companies
can typically dictate terms, influence the direction of research,
control how results are disseminated, gain access to valuable data for
their product development, and even lock organizations into exclusive
vendor relationships. To ensure that public interest technology remains
focused on its core mission—serving the public good—it is essential to
rethink these dynamics. The field must prioritize ethical, equitable
partnerships that uphold the values of transparency, fairness, and
accountability. Whenever possible, collaborations should be sought with
organizations that share these values, creating a more balanced and
sustainable ecosystem for technology development.

5.  **The continued (and increasing) relevance of educational
    institutions in the public interest technology ecosystem**

Educational institutions are essential to the public interest technology
ecosystem today, and they are producing the tech leaders of tomorrow.
Their role is becoming even more critical as technology continues to
shape every aspect of society, and they can help create a more diverse
set of actors influencing the direction of existing and new
technologies. Beyond technical skills, today’s students must be equipped
with a broader context to understand the societal impact of their work.
A multi-disciplinary approach to teaching technology is vital — students
must learn the ethical, social, and political implications of
technology. Incorporating more humanities, social sciences, and public
policy into technology curricula continues to be a crucial requirement.
Career offices, mentorship programs, and internship opportunities within
educational institutions are also key to preparing the next generation
of the technology workforce, who are deeply committed to addressing
societal needs through technology.

At Alkemio, we are already thinking of ways to engage with PIT-UN and
academic institutions focused on the public-interest mission through
opportunities for learning, project partnerships, and internships.

The public interest technology movement is younger in Europe, presenting
a unique opportunity to learn from the field-building efforts already
underway in the United States. As it gains momentum in the wake of a
consequential election cycle in the U.S., practitioners must be ready to
engage meaningfully with the value-aligned community in Europe and
globally. Working across geographies also adds valuable perspectives to
build a more inclusive movement and foster partnerships rooted in
diversity and shared values. Building a global community provides public
interest technology advocates opportunities to exchange ideas and
amplify their work and impact.

You can recap the event and watch session recordings
[here](https://pitcases.org/recap-2024-summit-at-sjsu/).
